---
title: '3D Gaussian Splatting Representation Compression'
excerpt:
  'Application of Learned Image/Video Compression Methods on 3D Gaussian
  Splatting'
collection: portfolio
---

3D Gaussian splatting has recently gained immense popularity due to its high
parallelizability and efficiency, allowing 3D scenes to be rendered faster than
neural radiance field-based methods while maintaining compa- rable quality.
However, representing a scene with 3D Gaussian splatting requires a large number
of Gaussian primitives, from hundreds of thousands to several millions,
resulting in high storage complexity. To address this issue, we investigate the
use of learned entropy models from the image compression literature and resid-
ual coding for Gaussian attribute compression. We also explore enhancements to
the 3D Gaussian splatting algorithm using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo framework
and investigate methods to reduce the number of Gaussian primitives through
learned primitive masking and importance-based pruning. Our experiments show
that optimizing Gaussian primitives with the Markov Chain Monte Carlo framework
significantly im- proves the visual quality of novel view synthesis.
Additionally, learned primitive masking and importance- based pruning can reduce
the number of Gaussian primitives by up to half without notable quality loss. We
demonstrate that learned entropy modeling, combined with a hyperprior network,
can integrate seamlessly into optimized Gaussian primitives, reducing their size
by up to 10 times without degrading visual quality. As the integration does not
require any modification in Gaussian primitives, it is an easy method to adopt.
Further investigation of hierarchy generation and residual coding reveals that
hierarchy structure with octree representation and weighted averaging does not
allow for higher compression efficiency, indicating a more complex Gaussian
attribute prediction scheme might be required to increase storage efficiency.
These find- ings highlight the potential for further storage improvements in 3D
Gaussian splatting while maintaining high visual quality, paving the way for
scalable rendering techniques.

For further information, please refer to the
[report](/files/3dgs-compression/3D-GS-Compression.pdf) and the
[presentation](/files/3dgs-compression/3D-GS-Compression.pptx) I have prepared
for my MSc semester thesis.

The details of the implementation can be accessed in
[Github](https://github.com/erenovic/GSCompression).

<div style="text-align: center;">
  <img src='/files/3dgs-compression/3dgs-compression.png' alt='3D Gaussian Splatting Representation Compression' style="width: 100%; height: auto;">
</div>
